@b{accident}: A random event that damages or destroys a unit.

@b{acp}: See ``action points''.

@b{action}: A single thing that a unit can do.  Examples include movement
to an adjacent cell, detonation, and repair.

@b{action points (acp)}: The basic number of actions available to a unit
during the turn.

@b{advance}: A scientific or social improvement achieved by a side.

@b{agreement}: A treaty or deal made between players, consisting of a
number of terms defining each player's part in the agreeement.

@b{AI}:  See ``Artificial Intelligence''.

@b{Artificial Intelligence (AI)}: A player that is run by code
internal to @i{Xconq}.

@b{altitude}: the z-coordinate of a unit, relative to its cell's elevation.

@b{area}: A section of the world that you play on.  An area may be
a polygon, or a cylinder if it is large enough to go all the way
around the world.

@b{attack}: An action where a unit attempts to damage another unit.

@b{attrition}: A gradual loss of a unit's hp, usually due to a harmful
environment.

@b{backdrop}: The set of activities that proceeds independently of
units and sides.  Backdrop activities include material production,
revolts, and attrition.

@b{border}: A special type of terrain that occurs between two cells.

@b{border slide}: A special kind of unit move that traverses a border
rather than crossing it.

@b{capture}: An action in which a unit attempts to bring another unit
over to its own side.

@b{cell}: A single location in an area, typically a hex or square shape.

@b{class}: See ``side class''.

@b{closeup}: A part of an interface that displays detailed information
about a side or unit.

@b{coating}: A layer that temporarily modifies terrain, such as snow.

@b{combat experience points (cxp)}: A property of a unit that indicates
how much combat the unit has engaged in previously.

@b{completeness points (cp)}:  The degree to which a unit is ready to
do things.  Newly-created units usually fall short of completeness.

@b{completion}: An action that brings a given unit closer to
being complete.

@b{connection}: A special type of terrain that negates the effects
of cell and border terrain between two adjacent cells.  Examples would be
roads and canals.

@b{construction}: A general term referring to the combination of creation
and completion actions that result in a usable unit.

@b{consumption}: The process by which units and terrain use up materials.

@b{control}: a) the ability of a side to direct a unit's activities, or
b) a layer in the world indicating which side is in charge of each cell.

@b{country}: The initial region of a side's units.

@b{coverage}: A set of numbers representing the quality of a side's
vision at each point in the world.

@b{cp}: See ``completeness points''.

@b{cxp}: See ``combat experience points''.

@b{creation}: An action by which a unit creates another unit.
Creation actions can specify that the newly-created unit is to be
at a given location or inside a given unit.

@b{designer}: A special kind of side/player that is permitted to 
examine and alter the entire state of the game directly, typically
for the purpose of designing new games.

@b{detach}: An action by which a variable-size units splits into
two units.

@b{detonation}: An action that results in hits on every unit near the
detonation.

@b{development}: The process of acquiring sufficient technology to
build or use a type of unit.

@b{disband}: An action that results in the orderly destruction of a unit.

@b{doctrine}: A set of flags and parameters that individual units of a
side use to help decide what to do, typically to fill in details that
are not specified explicitly by the units' orders.

@b{economy}: General term for the backdrop activities of material
production, distribution, and consumption.

@b{elevation}: The height of a cell above some arbitrary point.

@b{emblem}: An iconic image used by interfaces to represent a side.

@b{event}: See ``historical event''.

@b{extraction}: A type of action, by which a unit gets a material
from the terrain at a specific location.

@b{feature}: see ``geographical feature''.

@b{game design}: The set of type definitions and rules of a game,
usually composed from several game modules.

@b{Game Design Language (GDL)}: The language used to define @i{Xconq} games.

@b{game module}: A group of game-related definitions and information, not
necessarily a complete game design.

@b{geographical feature}: A named region in the world.

@b{goal}: A state or situation that units and/or sides can plan to
achieve.

@b{grammar}: A set of rules that define how a name or phrase will
be constructed from letters and/or syllables.

@b{hex}: A cell in a world where each cell is adjacent to exactly six others.

@b{historical event}: A single occurrence of a unit action or other state
change.

@b{history}: The record of historical events in a game.

@b{hit points (hp)}: The amount of damage that a unit can sustain before it
dies or is otherwise destroyed.

@b{hp}: See ``hit points''.

@b{image}: A visual icon or pattern used by interfaces to display units and
terrain.

@b{image family}: A collection of images, of various sizes,
orientations, colors, etc, all of which represent a single visual concept.

@b{independent unit}: A unit that does not belong to any side.

@b{interface}: The part of @i{Xconq} that manages interaction between
players and the kernel.  Interfaces draw maps, report action results,
interpret mouse clicks, and so forth.

@b{kernel}: The part of @i{Xconq} that manages the action of the game
itself.

@b{layer}: General name for a property that can have a distinct value
for each cell in the world, such as terrain, elevation, and ambient
temperature.

@b{list}: A linear list of units or sides displayed by an interface.
(Not available in all interfaces.)

@b{map}: An interface's visual display of part or all of a world.

@b{material}: A quantity of a material type.

@b{material type}:  A type of mass stuff, such as food or fuel.

@b{meridians}: Lines of latitude and longitude drawn on a map by an
interface.

@b{morale}: How a unit feels about itself and its abilities.

@b{move mode}: An interaction mode in which keystrokes and mouse clicks
direct units to do things, and the interface selects the next unit to
which these commands will apply.

@b{movement}: An action in which a unit changes its location.
The destination of movement may be either a cell or another unit.

@b{movement points (mp)}: The basic amount of mobility available to
a unit during a turn.  This is basically @code{(speed * acp)}.

@b{mp}: See ``movement points''.

@b{namer}: An object that generates names using a naming method.

@b{naming method}: An algorithm for generating names.

@b{occupant}: A unit that is contained in another unit.  See ``transport''.

@b{pattern}: A special kind of image that can be repeated many times in
a regular fashion.  Usually used to display terrain.

@b{people}: Special ``material types'' that are actually considered
to represent groups of individuals.

@b{plan}: The information that a unit uses to decide what to do next.
Both human-run and AI-run units have plans.

@b{player}: A participant in a game.  Can be a human or a computer.

@b{production}: The process by which units and terrain make amounts of
materials appear.

@b{property}: An attribute or value associated with a type or object,
such as a unit type's speed or a side's name.

@b{region}: A set of cells in the world.  It can be any size or shape.

@b{repair}: An action by which a unit adds to the hp of another unit.

@b{research}: The process by a side achieves an advance.

@b{reserve}: A unit's state, in which it does nothing for the
remainder of the current turn, but acts normally during the next
turn.

@b{revolt}: A random backdrop event in which a unit spontaneously
changes to another side.

@b{savefile}: A special game module that contains an exact replica of a game
in progress.

@b{scorekeeper}: An object that manages (part of) the standings of players
in a game, and also handles recording of final scores.

@b{self-unit}: A unit that represents the whole side.

@b{side}: The representation of a single player within the game.

@b{side class}: A group of sides with common characteristics, often
used to restrict the sides to which units can belong.

@b{sleep}: A unit's state, in which it does nothing at all.

@b{speed}: The ratio of movement points to action points.

@b{spying}: A backdrop process where units collect information about units
on other sides.

@b{stack}: A group of units at the same location, none of which are
inside another.

@b{standing orders}: A task that is attached to a set of conditions,
such as location and/or unit type, and which is given to any unit
satisfying the conditions.

@b{supply}: The materials being carried by a unit.

@b{supply line}: A path by which a unit can get supplies automatically
from another unit.

@b{surrender}: A random backdrop event in which a unit spontaneously
changes to the side of units that are nearby.

@b{survey mode}: An interaction mode in which keystrokes and mouse clicks
change the focus or scrolling of a map, and the player selects which unit
to move next.

@b{synthesis method}: An algorithm that can build part of the initial game
setup, usually randomly.

@b{table}: A two-dimensional array of numbers that define some
interaction between pairs of types.  Tables may be indexed by unit
types, material types, and terrain types, in various combinations.

@b{task}: A single element of a unit's plan.  A task usually results in one
or a few unit actions.

@b{task agenda}: A list of tasks that a unit plans to do.

@b{tech level}: An abstract number representing a side's ability to use
and/or construct a type of unit.

@b{terrain type}: One of a set of possible terrains.

@b{terrain subtype}: The specific role played by a terrain type.
Subtypes currently include open terrain, borders, connections, and coatings.

@b{tooling points (tp)}:  A unit's amount of preparation towards the
construction of a particular unit type.

@b{toolup}: The action by which a unit increases its tooling points
for some type.

@b{tp}: See ``tooling points''.

@b{transfer}: The process by which supplies/materials are moved from one
unit or cell to another.

@b{transport}: A unit that may contain other units.  See ``occupant''.

@b{turn}: A single cycle of unit actions and backdrop operation.

@b{unit}: A single distinct object, like a playing piece.

@b{unit type}: One of a set of possible types for the units in a game.

@b{vanish}:  The process whereby a unit is removed entirely from the game.

@b{variant}: A predefined option by which players can alter a game
before starting it.

@b{view}: A record of what a side has seen in the world.

@b{vision}: The mechanism by which a side's units collect and report
information about the world and about other units.

@b{world}: The entire space within which units move around.

@b{wreck}: The process whereby a unit that loses all of its hp changes
into another type of unit instead of disappearing.

@b{zoc}: See ``zone of control''.

@b{zone of control (zoc)}: A region around which a unit can affect the
behavior of other units.

